A tutorial on checking Pluscal specs (#1436)
informalsystems/apalache: docs/src/tutorials/pluscal-tutorial.md

> # Tutorial on checking Pluscal specifications with Apalache

Reviewer: I think the official spelling is Plus**C**al. I'm only marking the first occurrence.

**Difficulty: Blue trail – Easy**

> In this short tutorial, we show how to annotate a [Pluscal specification][] of
> the Bakery algorithm, to check it with Apalache. Further, we check mutual
> exclusion by bounded model checking for bounded executions. Moreover, we
> automatically prove mutual exclusion by induction and bounded model checking
> for unbounded executions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this short tutorial, we show how to annotate a [Pluscal specification][] of
the Bakery algorithm, to check it with Apalache. In particular, we check mutual
exclusion by _bounded model checking_ (which considers only bounded executions).
Moreover, we automatically prove mutual exclusion for unbounded executions by
_induction_.
```

Reviewer: Maybe also add forward references to the relevant sections?

We only focus on the part
related to Apalache. If you want to understand the Bakery algorithm and its
specification, check the comments in the original [Pluscal specification][].

## Related documents

> 

Reviewer 2: Are these meant to be prerequisites to this tutorial, or further reading that
can be pursued *after* completing this tutorial?

If the former, I'd suggest making it clear that the reader should already be
comfortable with the relevant material. If the latter, I suggest moving them to
the end under "Further reading". Either way, I suspect it will help readers to
indicate what the nature of the relation is :)

 - [Entry-level Tutorial on the Model Checker][]
 - [Tutorial on Snowcat][] shows how to write type annotations for Apalache.
 - [TLA+ Cheatsheet in HTML][] summarizes the common TLA+ constructs. If you
   prefer a printable version in pdf, check the [Summary of TLA+][].

## Setup

We assume that you have Apalache installed. If not, check the manual page on
[Apalache installation][]. The minimal required version is 0.22.0.

## Running example: Bakery

> We are starting with the [Pluscal specification][] of the Bakery algorithm.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We start with the [Pluscal specification][] of the Bakery algorithm.
```

This specification has been checked with the model checker [TLC][].
Moreover, [Leslie Lamport][] has proved safety of this algorithm with
the [TLAPS][].

## Step 0: Remove the TLAPS proof

Since we are not interested in the TLAPS proof, we copy [Bakery.tla][] to
[BakeryWoTlaps.tla][] and modify it as follows:

 - Remove `TLAPS` from the list of extended modules

    ```tla
    EXTENDS Naturals
    ```

 - Remove the theorem and its proof:

    ```tla
    THEOREM Spec => []MutualExclusion
    ...
    ```

> Alternatively, you can download the module `TLAPS.tla`.

Reviewer: Provide a link? Maybe this sentence is not needed.

Reviewer 2: I also thought this may not be needed.

Pluscal code, our annotations will get overridden. We propose another solution
that is stable under modification of the Pluscal code. To this end, we
introduce a new module called `BakeryTyped.tla` with the following contents:

```tla
{{#include ../../../test/tla/bakery-pluscal/BakeryTyped.tla:1:26}}
```

Due to the semantics of `INSTANCE`, the constants and variables declared in
`BakeryTyped.tla` substitute the constants and variables of
`BakeryWoTlaps.tla`. By doing so we effectively introduce type annotations.
Since we introduce a separate module, any changes in the Pluscal code do not
affect our type annotations.

Additionally, we add a constant initializer `ConstInit4`, which we will use
later. See the manual section about the [ConstInit predicate][] for a detailed
explanation.

## Step 2: Annotate the operator `\prec`

Let us run the type checker against `BakeryTyped.tla`:

```sh
$ apalache-mc typecheck BakeryTyped.tla
...
[BakeryWoTlaps.tla:66:17-66:20]: Cannot apply a to the argument 1 in a[1].
...
```

The type checker complains about types of `a` and `b` in the operator `\prec`:

```tla
{{#include ../../../test/tla/bakery-pluscal/BakeryWoTlaps.tla:66:67}}
```

> The issue is that the type checker is not able to decide, whether `a` and `b`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The issue is that the type checker is not able to decide whether `a` and `b`
```

are functions, sequences, or tuples. We help the type checker by adding type

> annotations to the operator `\preceq`.

Reviewer 3: You mention earlier, that you don't want to add variable annotations, because of volatility. I'd spend a sentence to emphasize that you can/should annotate `\preceq`, because it's _not_ pluscal generated, and thus not volatile.

```tla
{{#include ../../../test/tla/bakery-pluscal/BakeryWoTlaps.tla:63:67}}
```

When we run the type checker once again, it computes all types without
any problem:

```sh
$ apalache-mc typecheck BakeryTyped.tla
...
Type checker [OK]
```

## Step 3: Checking mutual exclusion for bounded executions

Once we have annotations, we run Apalache to check the property of mutual
exclusion for four processes and executions of length up to 10 steps:

```sh
$ apalache-mc apalache-mc check \
    --cinit=ConstInit4 --inv=MutualExclusion BakeryTyped.tla
...
It took me 0 days  0 hours 32 min  2 sec
```

Apalache reports no violation of `MutualExclusion`. This is a good start.

> Since Apalache by default analyzes the executions that make up to 10
> transitions, this analysis in incomplete.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, since Apalache only analyzes executions that make up to 10
transitions by default, this analysis is incomplete.
```

## Step 4: Checking mutual exclusion for unbounded executions

> To analyze executions of arbitrary length with Apalache, we can check an

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, since Apalache only analyzes executions that make up to 10
transitions by default, this analysis is incomplete.
```

inductive invariant. For details, see the section on [Checking inductive
invariants][]. The Bakery specification contains such an invariant written by
Leslie Lamport:

```tla
{{#include ../../../test/tla/bakery-pluscal/BakeryWoTlaps.tla:258:275}}
```

To prove that `Inv` is an inductive invariant for `N = 4`, we run Apalache
twice. First, we check that the initial states satisfy the invariant `Inv`:

```sh
$ apalache-mc apalache-mc check --cinit=ConstInit4 \
    --init=Init --inv=Inv --length=0 BakeryTyped.tla
...
The outcome is: NoError
It took me 0 days  0 hours  0 min  6 sec
```

> Second, we check that for every state that satisfies `IndInv`, the following
> holds true: Its successors via `Next` satisfy `IndInv` too. This is done as

Reviewer 4: Is this suppose to refer to `Inv`? 
```suggestion
Second, we check that for every state that satisfies `Inv`, the following
holds true: Its successors via `Next` satisfy `Inv` too. This is done as
```

follows:

```sh
$ apalache-mc apalache-mc check --cinit=ConstInit4 \
    --init=Inv --inv=Inv --length=1 BakeryTyped.tla
...
The outcome is: NoError
It took me 0 days  0 hours  0 min 28 sec
```

Now we know that `Inv` is indeed an inductive invariant. Hence, we check
the property `MutualExclusion` against the states that satisfy `Inv`:

```sh
$ apalache-mc apalache-mc check --cinit=ConstInit4 \
    --init=Inv --inv=MutualExclusion --length=0 BakeryTyped.tla
...
The outcome is: NoError
It took me 0 days  0 hours  0 min 9 sec
```

In particular, these three results allow us to conclude that `MutualExclusion`
holds for all states that are reachable from the initial states (satisfying
`Init`) via the available transitions (satisfying `Next`). Since we have fixed
the constant `N` with the predicate `ConstInit4`, this result holds true for `N
= 4`. If you want to check `MutualExclusion` for other values of `N`, you can
define a predicate similar to `ConstInit4`. We cannot check the invariant for
all values of `N`, as this would require Apalache to reason about unbounded
sets and functions, which is currently not supported.

> ## Discussion

Reviewer 2: Because this section only includes some concluding remarks, not a discussion

```suggestion
## Conclusion
 ```

> 

Reviewer 2: Because this section only includes some concluding remarks, not a discussion

```suggestion
 ## Conclusion
 ```

The final specifications can be found in
[BakeryTyped.tla](https://github.com/informalsystems/apalache/blob/unstable/test/tla/bakery-pluscal/BakeryTyped.tla)
and
[BakeryWoTlaps.tla](https://github.com/informalsystems/apalache/blob/unstable/test/tla/bakery-pluscal/BakeryWoTlaps.tla).

In this tutorial we have shown how to:

 - Annotate a Pluscal spec with types by introducing an additional TLA+ module.
 - Check safety of Bakery for bounded executions by bounded model checking (for
   `N=4`).

>  - Check safety of Bakery for unbounded executions by invariant checking (for

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - Check the safety of Bakery for bounded executions by bounded model checking (for
```

Reviewer 2: Sorry. This is in the wrong place. I'll fix it after our meeting.

   `N=4`).

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - Check the safety of Bakery for unbounded executions by invariant checking (for
```
